four three two one
David so first of all thanks for doing
this on my pleasure it excited how much
trouble are we in legitimately I mean
it's pretty bad already and it's gonna
get I think a lot lot worse so it's not
bad right now right here it's raining it
seems nice out the hill I mean how long
ago where the fires right I got a cue
ated this is October yeah it was rough
but in all fairness I've been evacuated
three times over the past 20 years yeah
I know the fires California's fires are
kind of interesting in that they both
seem like it's like the future the
apocalypse they're here but also it's so
familiar from like decades of wildfires
but you know their scientific estimates
that say that they're gonna get by the
end of the century sixty-four times
worse what yeah I think that numbers a
little high cuz that would mean more
than half of California burning every
year but I mean it's gonna get yeah
it'll get
it'll get crazy and there's no way to
avoid any of this wildfire stuff well I
mean you know if we don't raise the
temperature of the planet then but is is
that the only thing that's causing Wow I
mean like obviously if the temperature
raises there's more Brown dry leaves and
grass and stuff like that but yeah
there's a lot of preventative stuff you
can do I mean not building in certain
areas like I mean it used to be you know
the Indians who lived here before the
white people came did a lot of
controlled burning they like lived among
fires and I think that's like a probably
more responsible way to be but we've now
built up the whole state so that they're
all these homes that we don't want to
burn they're all these you know
properties we don't want to burn and
when you um when you like restrict the
ability of natural wildfires to burn
that means that like more tinder gets
built over time and then you know at
some point something lights the match
and it all burns so that I mean you
could you could do more controlled fire
you could take more aggressive action in
terms of you know like spraying foam and
that kind of thing um you could have a
lot more firefighters but I was just
talking to a guy yesterday I'm out here
actually doing some reporting on
wildfires and who was saying that no
Santa Ana powered wildfire has ever been
stopped by firefighters and he's like a
environmental historian wow it's like
you can hope that the winds redirect
them but like the action of firefighters
is basically just spitting in the wind
so the action is not the stop it's kind
of contain it
yeah it's best they can yeah and
minimize property damage yeah but you
know it's hard because you you have a
lot more it's a lot easier to do that
when you know if the land was totally
raw you'd be like all list we'll just
like try to direct the fire in this
direction but if the land is like full
of homes you're like what we can't you
have you ever seen it live not a
precious one yeah one time we were
filming Fear Factor and we were way up
on the five like probably I would say
maybe 75 miles from here and for a full
hour driving about 50 miles an hour
there was fire on the right-hand side of
the road for a full hour I mean like
Lord of the Rings end of the world yeah
like you're waiting for Satan to come
riding on a burning Phoenix over the top
of the hill it was crazy I've never seen
anything like it in my life
that was the worst one I've ever seen
but I think that was just because of
placement I think that this past one was
actually worse in terms of physical
damage and size it's just I didn't see
it the way I saw this one well last year
there were there were flames like
hopping over the 405 I mean yeah and
that's that's really like crazy to me
because you know I'm a New Yorker I've
lived my whole life in New York and I
just feel in my bones I now know it's
sort of not true but like my inner
emotional perspective on the world is
that I live in a fortress I don't live
in nature right like I walk down on
concrete streets I look up at steel
buildings nature can't come for me when
you see like fire straddling the 405
that's you know this is a major
metropolis here and we're not safe we're
certainly not totally safe and that's
like for me that's a major like a major
revelation I've had is that wherever you
live no matter how defended against
nature you are climate change is
teaching us that you know you still live
within climate and when it gets fucked
up it will fuck you up it will affect
you in some way yeah there was
the both sides of the 405 were in fire
last year last year the year before last
one of those but it was insane it was
it's it was Hank bel-air and people are
like well this is this we've never seen
this before I talked to a firefighter
once this was years ago and he told me
with the right wind it's a matter of
time for a fire hits the top of LA and
burns all the way to the ocean and heals
and there's not gonna be anything we
could do about it is if the right wind
catches and the fire starts at the top
of Los Angeles it'll just go straight
through la look at this what is that
from Jamie
or a five fire yeah okay oh that's it
that's the crazy video so this is Bel
Air on the left-hand side yeah and so
these are people driving down the 405
looking at you know the most insane site
for a place that has 30 million people
or whatever la has to see the entire
hillside on fire and Bel Air up to me
Bel Air is really interesting because
it's you know most climate impacts they
hit the world's poorest first and like
the wildfires are they work in the
reverse because it's like people living
in the hills yeah those are the rich
people but it just shows you like no
matter how rich you are no matter how
comforted by that wealth you are like
you know you might get hit well the best
example was Point Dume yeah and we were
flying over it my friend bill has a
helicopter license and so we went around
the peak of Point Dume it's crazy
because you know these are like 20
million dollar states these massive
Bluffs ID homes they thought they were
living in the peak of luxury over
viewing the ocean and like wow we're on
top of the world and the fire just
scorched it to the ground like that's
what it looks like now yeah
well it's really crazy cuz you're like
they couldn't even because people voice
at all well they'll protect the rich
folks they didn't protect these ones
yeah I think they can't protect anybody
when it gets this crazy the I think they
lost more than six hundred homes in
Malibu alone yeah I mean and that's I
mean yeah and you think about Miami
Beach going underwater and right and
it's well Miami Beach is a weird one
right because the the ground is porous
yeah
yeah so it's inevitable I'm gonna get
out of there there's basically a sandbar
that
some developers and xx decided that was
oh we can make this into a fake paradise
oh really
yeah I mean there was yeah I was um I
mean la is kind of the same way like
nobody looking at la in 1850 would have
said like here's a great place to build
a city right but we did it anyway like
America and it's like Imperial swagger
was like no we can create some paradise
out of this completely inhospitable land
in both places and then you know it's
just a lesson that like you know it's
just a matter of time well the most
cocky people are the people that have
those houses on stilts on the water yeah
in Malibu yeah how long is this gonna
work out for you yeah like this thing
moves back and forth over time and it
has forever I mean if you think about
like the long long sweep of human
history most human settlements didn't
happen on the coast right like people
lived in maybe they live on a river
maybe you have like a little community
on the river but the you know the last
like 50 years we were a hundred years
we've built up so especially in America
so much more on the coast and that's
like you know really inviting disaster I
mean all of Houston like all of that is
like that was flood plain that like
nature was like you know a swampland it
was and now it's you know new suburban
developments made out of concrete and
that just means more more flooding yeah
I've been to Houston right after floods
and it's Houston is a crazy one they we
lot there was a hotel lobbies to stay at
whenever I used to do gigs in Houston
it's gone now because though the
floodwaters just filled up the hotel so
crazy
I actually really love that city it's
kind of like a this great food oh yeah
Houston's super underrated exit to it
gets lumped into this weird sort of San
Antonio vibe I don't know why but I'm a
big fan of Houston I'm a big fan of
Texas in general they're fun people yeah
but yeah if it gets hotter they're
fucked too cuz it's just like in the
summertime in Houston you know when
you're dealing with 100 percent humidity
and it's 115 degrees outside
you can't even explain to people what
that feels like I mean even cooked
there's their places in the world that
are gonna be they're gonna literally
cook you by 2050 so cities in India and
the Middle East you won't be able to go
outside during the summer without ever
being a risk of dying by 2050 by 2050
like what kind of temperature we're
talking about well it's a combination of
heat and humidity so but you know
usually the heat will be like up in the
up around 130 combined with some bad
humidity
but you know they've already been we've
already broken that threshold like
they're been temperature records set
every year but last year broke 113 OMA
on I think but like the scarier parts
are not some of these crazy desert
places that have gotten really hot it's
that the cities like Calcutta has like
12 million people in it and you may not
be able to you may not be able to live
there in the summer in just 30 years
mm-hmm
and then you think about where all those
people are going and how much that's
going to destabilize everything you know
I've talked to people who are terrified
about this and I've talked to people who
are nonchalant where where do you sit
are you terrified you thinking that
you're going to be physically in trouble
yourself or do you think that with
proper planning and just not being tied
to one spot you can move to another area
I mean I have I have different feelings
about it at different times a day
because it's that big a story it's like
gonna affect everything I think you know
I think civilization is not going to
collapse I think like there'll be people
around even living like kind of
rewarding prosperous lives forever and
the question is like what shape those
lives take and where they're where they
are so me personally you know unlike a
relatively well-off person who lives in
America in you know New York I think
I'll be able to do ok I think my
children will be able to do okay and
when I imagine their future I think it's
a reflection of all of our kind of like
cognitive biases and emotional reflexes
that when I imagine like my daughter's
future I'm imagining a world that seems
a lot like the one that we live in today
mm-hmm but when I look at the science it
paints a really really bleak picture so
you know the question of like optimism
and alarm I think it's really all a
matter of perspective right so we're at
one point one degree Celsius right now I
think there's basically no way that we
avoid two degrees of warming which is
like this UN calls catastrophic warming
the island nations of the world call
genocide and that's when we would be
making these cities in the Middle East
unlivable it would mean like some ice
sheets would start a permanent collapse
which could all of the melted eventually
bring 260 feet of sea-level rise and
we're on track for four degrees of
warming so that would mean
hundred trillion dollars and climate
damages by the end of the century that's
twice as much wealth as exist in the
world today it would mean there be parts
of the world scientists say where you
could be hit by six simultaneous climate
disasters at once there be at least a
few hundred climate refugees the UN says
the low-end estimate is 200 million the
high-end estimate is a billion which as
many people as live in North and South
America comprised opulence yes six
simultaneous natural disasters at once
yeah what does that mean like flooding
hurricane famine you know some public
health issue um like malaria it's like
every every category of modern life can
be affected by this and there aren't
that many that could be hit by six but
like already right now in Australia
there is a crazy heatwave it's like over
120 and lots of Australia they're also
dealing with like epic floods in other
parts of the country and that's kind of
the problem actually with wildfires in
California it's not just that it's
getting hotter is that it's also getting
wetter so the more rain means more
growth means when it gets hot again that
growth gets baked and then becomes you
know firestarter mmm and that's the you
know it's not just it's not just a
temperature it's like higher
temperatures mean crazier extremes in
all directions and you know that's why I
think sort of looking big-picture
there's not a life on Earth that's gonna
be untouched by this force like over the
decades ahead but that's not to say that
we're all be destroyed by it either I
think like we will find ways to live and
adapt and mitigate it's just a question
of how much it's gonna screw up our
politics how much it's gonna change the
way we think of history you know like
I'm an end of I'm a 90s kid I grew up
end of history thinking the world was
gonna get better the world was gonna get
richer globalization was progress etc
what does it mean if like climate change
completely eliminates the possibility of
economic growth which probably won't be
the case for the u.s. but there are huge
parts of the world where that is going
to be the case if we don't change course
now so like at the end of the century if
we don't change course the economist
studying this say global GDP could be at
least 20 possibly 30 percent smaller
than it would be without climate change
30 percent is twice as big an impact as
the Great Depression how did you get
involved in this how'd you get involved
studying this and what was your
perception before you got involved and
how did it shift so I'm a journalist I'm
an editor mostly actually at New York
Magazine and you know I'm interested in
the near future like as a result read a
lot of scientific papers read a lot of
like obscure subreddits and that kind of
thing and um just in 2016 started seeing
a lot more of that a lot more of the
news from science was about climate and
a lot more of that climate news was
really scary and when I looked around at
the other places that like we think of
as our competitors you know newspapers
TV shows I just felt like the scarier
end of the spectrum was just not at all
being talked about so most scientists
talked about this two degree threshold
is like the threshold of catastrophe and
I think most laypeople think that that
means that that's kind of a ceiling for
warming like that'll be the worst that
could get but actually it's functionally
the best case scenario and yet we hadn't
had any storytelling any discussion
around what the world would look like
north of two degrees and I just felt as
a journalist I was like holy shit
there's a huge story here like the way
that this world could be completely
transformed by these forces is not
something that anybody's writing about
in parkas it's a long story but
scientists and science journalists were
really they were really focused on
making sure that their messaging was
hopeful and optimistic and they were
reluctant to talk about them scariest
findings and so I was terrified by the
science I looked at it and I was like
nobody's talking about this as scary
gotta like spread the word and I wrote a
big piece in 2017 that was very focused
on worst-case scenarios so I mentioned
before I think 2 degrees is about our
best-case scenario 4 degrees is where
we're on track 4 now this piece was
looking at five six eight degrees of
warming so things were not likely to get
this century at least and it was a huge
phenomenon it was read by a bunch of
million people the biggest story that
New York magazine had ever published and
I just thought man I guess there are a
lot of people like me out there who had
intuitions about climate suffering and
terror but aren't seeing it in the way
people are writing about the story so I
decided you know there's there's more to
say and even beyond like telling the the
bleak storytelling that really dark
talking about the really dark
possibilities I just thought
there are all these categories of life
that we haven't even thought about how
they'll impact so we we know about sea
level rise but that's like as I
mentioned before that makes you think if
you live off the coast you'll be okay
but the whole planet is gonna be touched
by this some places are going to be hip
harder than others
India is gonna be hit by like 29% of uh
global climate impacts of the century
but everyone's gonna be affected in some
way and the way that changes our
politics the way it changes our pop
culture the way it changes our
psychology our mood our relationship to
history how we think about the future
how we think about the past what we
expect from capitalism what we blame
capitalism for what we expect from
technology what we think technology can
do can technology save us can technology
entertain us while the BIRT world is
burning these are all these kind of like
humanities questions that I felt really
what really had not been talked about
and so the book does like it's a tour
through what the world would look like
between two and four degrees but it's
also which is a kind of hellscape but it
is also you know about half of it is
about we're gonna live here we're gonna
survive in what form what will it mean
you know myth at the mythological level
what will it mean at the personal level
what will it mean the way we think about
our kids and their futures and all that
stuff and you know my my my big-picture
thinking about it is yeah it's really
bleak and I think there are some
possible ways that we could avert some
of these worst-case scenarios I mean
there is technology that can suck carbon
out of the atmosphere already it hasn't
been tested at scale it's really
expensive but if we really if we can
over that you know the next decade or
two really like build it like global
plantations of these carbon capture
machines then not only can we like stop
the problem from moving forward we could
actually reverse it a little bit um you
have seen those before I've seen the
designs for those where they have these
enormous like apartment building sized
air filter things yeah I mean it's
basically like only in theory they're
they do exist in in the real world but
only that I kind of like it in
laboratories they don't exist at
anything like the scale they need to but
there's a guy at Harvard named David
Keith who has tested his machines
they're able to take carbon dioxide
out of the atmosphere at a cost of $100
a ton which would mean we could totally
neutralize the entire the entire carbon
footprint of the global economy we
wouldn't have to change anything we
could suck out all the extra carbon were
putting into the atmosphere for cost of
three trillion dollars a year there's a
lot of money but their estimates for how
much we're subsidizing the fossil fuel
business that are as high as five
trillion dollars a year so if we just
redirected those subsidies to this
technology in theory we could literally
solve the problem immediately there are
other complications it's like in order
to store the carbon you need an industry
that's two or three times the size of
our present oil and gas industry which
and where that goes and next to whose
homes and all that stuff it's
complicated but we have the tools we
need it's just a matter of deciding to
put them into practice and and we're
pretty like that you know recent history
shows that we're not doing that fast
enough so one of the big you know points
that I'd like I'm making the book in its
six in my head so strongly is you know
we think of climate changes this thing
that started an industrial revolution
like centuries ago but half of all the
carbon that we've put into the
atmosphere in the history of humanity
from the burning of fossil fuels has
come in 30 years the last 30 years that
since Al Gore published his first book
on warming it's since the UN established
their climate change panel it's since
the premiere of Seinfeld so the you and
I have lived through the lion's share of
all of the damage done to the climate in
all of human history whoa yeah and the
next 30 years are going to be just as
consequential so we brought the world
from the basically a stable climate to
the brink of total climate catastrophe
in 30 years
one generation we have about one
generation to save it to me that's like
it makes me uncomfortable to use this
language but it's basically a
theological story we have the entire
fate of the planet in the hands of these
two generations what happens 50 years
from now a hundred years from now will
entirely be up to the way we act now and
what we do and the timescale is so crazy
because you have this really compressed
we must act now to avert these
worst-case scenarios timescale
but also the impacts will unfold if we
don't do anything over millennia so like
we could have you know if we really
bring into being a total melt of all ice
sheets that means that eight centuries
from now twelve centuries from now
people will be dealing with the shit
that were fucking up today we will be
engineering problems for them to be
solving 800 1200 1500 years from now and
that damage will be done if it is done
in the next 30 or 50 years so we are I
mean we are really writing this epic
story about earth humanity and our
future on this planet in the time of a
single lifetime a single generation and
that is on the on the one hand it's sort
of like overwhelming but it's also
empowering you know like all the climate
impacts that I talk about all the
climate horrors that are really
terrifying if we make them happen we
will be making them happen the main
input in the system is how much carbon
we put into the atmosphere
there are feedback loops that people are
worried about there are things about
climate that we can't control but at
least at this point the main driver of
future warming is what we do and so we
could if we get to a four degree
hellscape with hundreds of millions or a
billion climate refugees that will be
because of what we're doing it's not
some system outside of our control even
though we're often kind of we find it
kind of comforting to think that it's
outside of our control because that
means we don't have to change it well
one of the problems with climate change
is that human beings like to react to
things that are immediate and right in
front of them and I think for us it's
very difficult to see the future
especially if it's inconvenient
especially if it does something to
inconvenience or get in the way of our
day to day routine and that seems to be
what's happening here and that seems to
me that seems to me to be why people are
so willing to dismiss it so flippantly
because in front of them right now it's
not an issue in front of them right now
this very second is very day I'm gonna
go to Starbucks it's right there it's
open look I'm outside it's 65 degrees
out
warming's not a problem yeah no I think
that's I mean totally true and I feel it
in my own life like I I mean I've been
living I've been working in this
material so long I know it so deeply and
yet when I look out the window I'm like
you know things are fine yeah
and I think that has a really powerful
anchoring effect like we expect the
world of the future to look like the
world as it does today
but all the science says that's totally
naive yeah and we're gonna have at least
twice as much warming as we've had to
this point and I think we need to think
about the future of the world in those
terms like what it will be at 2 degrees
at 3 degrees at 4 degrees but it's not
just like the immediacy I think we have
so many biases that make like we want to
be optimistic about the future we have a
status quo bias we we don't want to
change things we think that'll be
complicated and expensive we have a hard
time holding big ideas in our head like
that the entire planet is like subject
to these forces I mean the list goes on
and on in the book I have a little riff
where I say you know there's this new
not so new now 3040 year um discipline
in economics behavioral economics which
is about all of our cognitive biases how
we can't really see the world every
single one makes it harder to see
climate there's this he's actually an
english professor named timothy Morton
who wrote a book about climate he calls
it a hyper object which is like it's a
it's a phenomenon that's so big that we
can't actually hold it in our heads at
once we can only see it it's like if you
imagine seeing a four dimensional object
in three-dimensional space it's that
kind of thing where you can only see it
at an angle only partially climate
change is so all-encompassing that we
can't comprehend it properly but I think
that's all of those things are reasons
that we need to be listening to the
scientists and what they're projecting
not to say that everything they're
saying is going to come true will come
true exactly as they predict it
obviously that's not how science works
it gets revised some things or alarmist
some things are extreme something's just
wrong but you know I've been really
working on this stuff for a couple years
and the number of papers I've read that
show that make me have a more optimistic
idea about the future of climate I could
count on two hands and the number of
papers I've read that make me have a
view of the future it's in the thousands
and when you look at the totality of
that whether the six climate driven
natural disasters prediction is gonna
pan out exactly as those authors say who
knows but when you see you know so many
so many terrifying studies that you
could fill like I did a 300 page book
with them you realize that like there's
a huge margin for error and it would
like we would still be really in bad
shape you know is there a I mean I'm
sure there have been some studies that
made mistakes in terms of like past
studies that projected that by now we'd
all be dead are those a those seem to be
a problem with this whole concept we
have of wrapping our head around it and
if we find anything that we could point
to that say oddly back in the eighties
they said we all be dead by now and
we're fine we're gonna be fine that kind
of thing is that that is an issue
correct totally yeah there was um there
was a really famous book in the middle
of the 20th century called the
Population Bomb
so this is a guy named Paul Ehrlich
Ehrlich um who he was like you know the
world just cannot support this many
people like if we get to eight billion
people there just won't be enough food
there won't be you know that the planet
can't sustain that and he's often
pointed to is this sort of like prophet
of doomsday that and his prophecy
totally didn't work out because we had
this thing that's called the Green
Revolution basically we figured out ways
to make crops way way way more
productive and that's encouraging
human civilization does that a lot we
figure our way out of foxholes all the
time yeah but that revolution was
literally like one dude Norman Borlaug
who figured out how to grow crops
differently in one guy one set of
innovations and he completely
transformed the whole fate of the planet
what did he do he just basically did
like genetically modified crops before
like the you know before the name it was
like um he's the Golden Rice guy yeah
okay yeah and and you know the whole
developing world benefitted enormously
and you're still seeing that today like
we see all these charts that you know so
much less poverty so much less infant
mortality and in developing world and
that's great that's like incredible
progress but a lot of that has
was powered by the industrialization of
those countries so that bill is gonna
come due going forward and you know I
think like when you look at climate
change you know if it was just one
threat like let's take our culture since
we're talking about agriculture
estimates say that if we continue on the
path we're on by the end of the century
grain yields would be half as productive
as they are today just by the
temperature effect so we'd have just as
much land just as much grain crops as we
have now but the food we get from it
we'd only get half as much as we get
today what's the cause of that it's just
the temperature affects play us the
temperature alone yeah Wow I mean there
are other impacts too on food like
insects there's you know hydro
temperatures means more insects which is
bad for crops the carbon has a
complicated relationship to crop growth
like in some plants grow bread better
with more carbon but actually they're
like the weeds and the ones that we like
to eat don't grow better with more
carbon and you know by the end of the
century so we could have half as much
grain and we could have 50% more people
than we have right now now there's a way
you could imagine oh well like maybe
there'll be another Norman Borlaug maybe
he'll figure out our way through that
but when you look across the spectrum
it's like agriculture it's you know
conflict for every 1/2 degree of warming
you need to get between 10 and 20
percent more war so if we get to the end
of the century we're gonna have more
than twice as much war as we have to and
this is projected because the battles
over resources mainly that famines
droughts weather you know weather
impacts basically everything about
unstable societies get stressed by
temperature rise the Syrian civil war
was you know wasn't singly caused by
climate change but it was that's one of
the causes there was a drought and that
produced it and that conflict it's not
just at the level of nation states or
even civil war it's also at the level of
individuals so if you look at crime
statistics when temperatures go up
there's more murder there's more rape
people get admitted to mental hospitals
more when there's when it's warmer out
babies developed less well in the womb
when it's hotter out if there's for
every day over ninety degrees that a
babies in the womb you can see those
days in that baby's lifetime earnings
and we're living we're gonna be living
on a planet that's considerably warmer
that's gonna have real dramatic effects
on everything air pollution there's a
big study that I write about in the book
that's totally alarming and eye-opening
just between 1.5 degrees in two degrees
of warming just through the effects of
air pollution would cause that 1/2
degree of warming would cause an
additional 153 million deaths which is
25 Halla costs that's just air pollution
just between 1.5 and 2 degrees and 2
degrees for me is our best-case scenario
so our best case scenario is 25
Holocaust swerd of death from air
pollution and that sounds terrifying
people when I say that to them they're
like holy shit how could we possibly
that's unconscionable but already 9
million people are dying every year from
air pollution and we don't pay attention
to it
so I think the likeliest outcome even as
we enter into this like climate
hellscape is that we find ways to turn
away and not look at like the real pain
of people especially in the developing
world but to end to answer your earlier
question you know like you can imagine
agriculture getting figured out but when
you see just how many impacts there are
it's like it's everywhere everything
will be changed and it just makes the
challenge that much bigger and more
complicated because how you get you know
how are you gonna solve the conflict
problem how are you gonna solve the the
problem of having 30% less economic
growth you know like I said that's an
impact that's twice as big as the Great
Depression and it would be permanent six
hundred trillion dollars in in climate
damages twice as much wealth as exists
in the world today
and that's just you know then you deal
with the right you refugees food I mean
it's it's it's so all-encompassing and I
think that's another reason why we don't
want to look at it closely because it's
terrifying well there's also a matter of
how it's being projected to the public
right like in in certain circles
particularly right-wing circles there
there are people that are trying to
paint this with rose-colored glasses
right they're trying to maximize
short-term profits and sort of dismiss
the
risks of climate change and dismiss the
risks of or rather the impact of our
what we've done in terms of raising the
carbon in the end yes here there's some
people that point to that like this this
is nonsense science this has been
disproven there's a few people like that
but it's overwhelming the overwhelming
consensus of scientists have studied
this or terrified yeah I would say there
was some recent report that said it now
passed the standard of physics that like
climate science is now more reliable
than physics vais hilarious yeah but you
know the to the deniers who say things
like you know the planet was hotter than
this before that's true yeah dinosaurs
lived here humans were not here I mean
if we were four degrees warmer for the
last time the planet was four degrees
warmer there were palm trees in the
Arctic
what's yeah really we've already exited
the entire window of temperature that
enclosed all of human history so the
planet is now warmer than it ever has
been when humans were around to walk on
it which means to me it's an open
question whether humans would have ever
evolved in the first place this is all
from the Industrial Revolution from then
on yeah and yeah and like and to that
question it's like there are people who
say there's some natural warming going
on I don't think that's true I think
most scientists would say it isn't but I
also think if what we're seeing is
natural warming that should terrify us
even more because it would mean that
it's outside of our control and if we're
really heading down the path that we're
heading down and we have no control over
it that's even more scary it should be a
comfort that we're doing it because that
means we can stop doing it right well it
should be a comfort that there's people
smarter than the people that don't think
that we're doing it that there are
people that can possibly consider some
sort of way to mitigate this yeah and
what what are the what are the ways of
being proposed and how seriously are
they're being taken other than this the
idea of building these machines to
extract carbon in the atmosphere I'm
sure you're probably aware of there's
some of the programs that they've talked
about were suspending reflective
particles in the atmosphere to minimize
the amount of solar radiation we receive
yeah so it's interesting this guy who I
mentioned earlier who's
done the most the sort of most
innovative carbon capture machine I
talked to him a few weeks ago and he was
like no no no but we shouldn't be using
carbon capture we should be doing solar
geoengineering which is what you're
talking about and that means probably
suspending sulfur is like the most
useful thing in the atmosphere I'm great
we're gonna smell like sulfur no this
not the sky would get red out Jesus
there are all of these aesthetic effects
to which nobody talks about so like
trees are gonna just turn immediately
Brown I'm not gonna turn color there was
a study a couple weeks ago that the
oceans are gonna change color there this
is if we do that we suspend no no this
is just your warming just from warming
the oceans gonna change power to what
yeah I think just from more green to
more blue but be nice yeah
but yes the sulfur thing is I so we
could you know we could suspend these
basically an umbrella of sulfur around
in the atmosphere which would mean that
it would some of the sunlight coming to
the earth would be reflected back into
the atmosphere and that would mean that
the Sun would absorb less sunlight I
mean there would absorb less on sunlight
which would make it a little bit cooler
the problem is that would have some
crippling impacts on agriculture and we
basically don't know other side effects
that would have and how would you take
that stuff out well you could just stop
doing it it has a shelf life of I don't
know what it is ten years so you could
just stop doing it and that's a big
concern actually because if we did that
just to mask the amount of global
warming that we were doing then whatever
program was responsible for it would be
really vulnerable to terrorism to war
because if we if we were if the planet
were functionally warmed say five
degrees but we were suspending enough
sulfur that it was actually only two
degrees warmer then if we just for
instance like somebody bombed the
facility that was doing it the planet
would be immediately tripped into a much
much hotter State and that would be
completely catastrophic even more
catastrophic than a more slow approach
to five degrees because we would just do
it we over a century or several
centuries we met in ways we'd be able to
adjust to sort of was it with you in
immediate you know why sulfur I think
it's just something about the particular
characteristic of it I don't know
wouldn't it smell her I mean would
literally be like hell like that's what
you yeah
always hear about with the horror movies
right the devil smells like sulfur yeah
and I mean it's the it's what farts
smell like yeah and the reason that we
were the reason we're able to smell
farts is because sulfur is also I mean
some related compounds hydrogen sulfide
are are really toxic and so that brings
me to methane that's another issue as
well right yeah the cows producing
methane gas yeah a large-scale
agricultural yeah wait let me just say
one more thing about the solar
geoengineering so the thing about that
that's real this sounds horrifying this
program people are excited about it is
really cheap it's way cheaper than
carbon capture and but so there's a
positive for it but it's also we are
basically already doing this so we have
what's called small particulate
pollution that's or aerosol pollution um
stuff to spend the name in the
atmosphere that's why like Delhi is
really hard to breathe in because we
have a lot of particulate in the
atmosphere that is already suppressing
global temperatures by as much as a half
degree or maybe one degree which means
and that's the reason that those 9
million people are dying every year from
air pollution so if we solve that
problem if we solve the air pollution
problem save those 9 million lives we
every year we would immediately make the
planet at least a half a degree warmer
and possibly one degree warmer which
would put us at the threshold of
catastrophe or above it so we're sort of
already doing this program just not in a
systematic way we're doing it in a
haphazard way the methane you mentioned
they're basically two big issues with
methane
the first is cows
so yeah cows produced a ton of methane
which is depending on how you count
about 35 or maybe eighty five times
stronger a greenhouse gas than carbon
whoa yeah it's really intense but
they're also these like small-scale
studies that show if we feed cattle just
a little bit of seaweed they're methane
emissions could fall by 95 or 99 percent
so we could if if that was scaleable
which is not clear it is but if it was
we could immediately eliminate the
entire carbon footprint of beef which
people talk about a lot now that's
incredible
yeah just it's a reminder to me that
like you know you get told all you
should eat less hamburgers or whatever
but obviously this is like a problem
that's too big to be solved with like
individual choices we need some kind of
global
policy or national policy about it but
the scarier methane issue is um there's
all this carbon stored in frozen
permafrost in the northern latitudes
that permafrost is melting and when it
melts that carbon will be released into
the atmosphere we don't know the
proportion that it will be released as
carbon dioxide versus methane but there
is in that permafrost twice as much
carbon as now exists in the atmosphere
which means if it were all released
possibly in a relatively sudden way it
could make our carbon problem
immediately three times worse and it
could be even the effect could even be
more dramatic than that if it was
released mostly as methane because
methane is a stronger greenhouse gas
most scientists think that that's not
something that we need to freak out
about in the short term but it's there
it is melting and methane is being
released at some rate so craziest
solution that I ever heard for that one
was to bring back the woolly mammoth
yeah yeah they're trying to do that yeah
and the idea that the woolly mammoth is
gonna save us all by releasing them
throughout Siberia yeah that's crazy
right I mean I think that we're gonna
have a whole a century of shit like that
and shit like cows eating seaweed that
everything you know we'll have our
global politics will be reoriented
around climate change so that you'll
start to see sanctions put against
nations that are behaving badly MBS the
guy who's you know that like kind of
thug who's running Saudi Arabia now says
he needs Saudi Arabia's economy to be
totally off oil by 2050 and I think
that's because he knows that you know
the global community will not tolerate
someone producing more oil and as
recently as it you know as soon as a few
decades from now but the impacts are you
know everywhere so that like yeah like
in California now you can you know
during wildfire season you can buy masks
to you know to shield yourself from the
smoke which is really really damaging
its effects on cognitive performance are
really dramatic can lower cognitive
performance by like 10 to 15 percent its
effect on the development of kids is
really dramatic there was an incredible
study a few years ago where if you
looked at places where they Institute it
easy but you have easy pass out here in
California
no we don't we don't have tolls all
right it's so amazing yeah I think one
or two places yeah but like depending on
where you lived you'd have to take that
every day dude in New York the river
right now I know to me I like that okay
so it used to be the case that cars had
to like slow down and pay a toll yeah
and because they were slowing down
they're producing more exhaust when they
instituted EZ Pass cars could just drive
through right and that meant they
produce less exhaust and the effect on
the unpremeditated these new easy passed
toll plazas it reduced them by like 15%
each that's how dramatic just the
exhaust effect is on development of
babies how much is an effect of electric
cars yeah that can I mean that that will
be right now it hasn't had enough of an
effect because there's not enough of
them yeah and but yeah I mean the that
problem on that unlike the technological
level has been solved we know how to
replace cars with electric cars we can
make them even pretty affordable not
quite as affordable as they need to be
but the new Tesla's are like 35 grand I
think if you get it down to 15 grands
that'll be you know that'll be a huge
solution but then there are a lot of
other problems that are more difficult
like air travel yeah we don't have
electric planes around the corner you
can't fly planes is there anything like
that on the horizon there are some
people who are trying to develop it but
it seems like probably it's at least
like a decade away and you know one
cross-country flight in the u.s. is the
equivalent one seat on one Costco
cross-country flight is the equivalent
of eight months of driving every time
you fly from New York to London and back
you melt 9 3 square meters of ice every
single seat on every flight from New
York to London melts 3 square meters of
ice of Arctic assets yeah
that's insane that's real yeah yeah I
think it's hairy at the time you fly
across the country it's like eight
months of driving yeah whoa so globally
air travel is only 2% of the carbon
footprint so it's relatively small but
for people in especially rich people in
rich countries it's a much bigger part
of the focus they fly around all yes but
yeah I know the average American I think
the stat is the average American every
year Amit
enough carbon to melt 10,000 tons of ice
Jesus Christ that's just the average
American and if you're a person like me
who flies like every other weekend it's
way worse way worse yeah oh so holy shit
you put in that perspective it's how
much fuckin eyes is there I mean there's
a lot of ice yeah but it's gonna melt
well that's how you get you know the out
the outside projections the high-end
projections for sea level rise are 260
feet no the the plus sign is it's way
better to get hotter than it is to get
colder right like I say just kill
everything well the you know the each of
the so they've been five mass
extinctions in planetary history in the
Earth's history before one of them was
killed was caused by an asteroid but the
other four were were produced by global
warming related to greenhouse gas and
one of them the Ice Age well the ice age
doesn't count it didn't didn't kill as
many no really the the biggest mass
extinction the end-permian extinction
which is 252 million years ago 90 to 95
percent of all life on Earth died when
was that 252 million years so each of
these mass extinctions basically is like
a complete slate wiping of the
evolutionary record it's like we're
starting over from scratch so we want to
think that the the asteroid that hit the
Yucatan did the most damage in terms of
the fossil record is that not true is
the one that was the the global warming
was that more well there's so they're
five and four of them were from global
warming and the worst the worst one was
just from from greenhouse gas warming
but yeah the one that killed the
dinosaurs was also really bad it was
something like 70% of all life on but
it's less than the one where there was a
temperature rise yeah Wow
there was a volcano this is a little bit
sketchy science but there was a volcano
explosion something like thirty thousand
years ago or something I don't remember
the exact dates but that volcanoes can
cool a global temperature for the same
reason we're talking about with
suspending particles because it
basically clouds the atmosphere with and
it dropped global temperatures I think
it was two degrees and the human popular
at the time then shrunk to 7,000 there's
a bunch of times that's less people
didn't live on Nantucket and it just it
just makes you see like everything about
the way that we live on this planet is
dependent on climate conditions
yeah like we'll figure a way to like
have a civilization but it will be
transformed it will be very different if
the world is four degrees warmer um and
you know everything about the way that
we take for everything we take for
granted today is like a permanent
feature of the modern world I think
we're going to learn is much more
precarious much more unstable and yeah
like I said earlier you know climates
were stable for all of human history
that's how we were able to evolve it's
how we were able to invent agriculture
the part of the world where we did
invent agriculture the Middle East it's
now getting almost too hot to grow crops
it's also gonna be too hot to go to
Mecca for a pilgrimage in just a couple
decades weather like we're entirely
outside of that window of temperatures
which means we're functionally now
living on an entirely different planet
than humans ever lived on before and
it's going to keep changing so by the
time we get to two or three or four
degrees we'll be living in a climate
that's you know two or three or four
times as much different as the one that
we're is now from the one before the
Industrial Revolution and yet it's like
those impacts could be totally
overwhelming and catastrophic now the Al
Gore film is something that scared a lot
of people but it was also very widely
dismissed by a lot of other people as
well how accurate was that movie I think
it proved to be too sanguine it like it
didn't deal with a lot of extreme
weather I thought that stuff was far
away and I think this is one of the one
of the big shortcomings of most writing
about climate most kind of communication
about climate for 25 years is that we
were told it was slow we were told it
was going to be coming maybe at the
scale of centuries something we'd have
to worry about for our grandchildren but
when you realize that half of all the
damage we've done has been done in the
last 30 years and you see already the
whether we had a global heatwave last
summer totally unprecedented people died
in Canada they died in Russia they died
in the Middle East the same season three
million people were evacuated in China
from a typhoon unprecedented rains in
Japan we had multiple hurricanes in the
Caribbean all at once there was an
island in Hawaii East island small
island not one that most people have
gone to but got literally wiped off the
map by a hurricane they're thinking
about inventing a new category of
hurricane category six all of these
impacts were are coming much faster than
scientists predicted even a decade or
two ago and so I think the first thing
can mean in truth is a little too
complacent but Al Gore is also you know
I know him a little bit I've talked to
him a few times he's um temperamentally
he's a technocrat he's an optimist
he thinks market forces can solve all
this stuff and I don't even totally
disagree with him I think the market
force is really powerful we've had a
huge green energy revolution in the u.s.
that's you know and had spillover
effects elsewhere in the world so solar
power is now cheaper than anybody
expected it would be a decade or two ago
although it's also the case that we
haven't replaced any of our dirty energy
with it we've just added to our capacity
so the ratio of renewable energy to
dirty energy is now the same as it was
40 years ago so we made no progress why
is that because we just if we're like
rather than saying oh let's retire this
coal plant and replace it with it you
know a wind farm we think oh we'll have
the coal plant and the wind farm will
have more energy mmm you know we just
grow the pie of energy and this is
unnecessary it's not because there's
just a massive demand is it just because
they don't want to end that industry
yeah I mean there is a demand people
like energy Trump was talking about
clean coal yeah and everybody was like
what the fuck are you talking about yeah
clean coal I mean I think on some level
American policy is a red herring the
u.s. is 15 percent of global emissions
and we're falling the future climate of
the world will be determined by China by
India by sub-saharan Africa those are
carbon footprints that are growing China
is now almost twice as big a carbon
footprint as the US and they're building
all this infrastructure outside
chyna that doesn't even count in Asia
and Africa
you know the Belton roads you know this
no project so basically taking the model
that the US had with like the Suez Canal
and the Panama Canal and they're
building the infrastructure of the
developing world so recently they loaned
Kenya a huge amount of money to build a
new rail line which was being built with
Chinese workers they built the rail line
then that can you couldn't pay back the
debt so China is threatening to take
over the entire port of Mombasa as debt
repayment and this is like going on all
around the world highways across Africa
across Asia are being built by Chinese
workers as an in an effort to build a
new Imperial infrastructure for
themselves and is the thought that
they're doing this in terms of setting
up the debt in a way that's unpayable so
that they could take over
that's one motive I think that the Kenya
example but they'd be happy if the deck
out repaid I think it's there they're
stitching together an alternative to the
Western infrastructure of trade and
transit they're basically stitching
together an entire second system of how
the world will work how the economy will
work and it will be conducted through
their own infrastructure and through
their own ports and through their own
airports and that's being done by their
own standards so China is now pouring
more concrete every three years than the
entire than the u.s. poured in the
entire 20th century she was crying if
concrete were a country it would be the
world's third biggest carbon emitter so
the the path of development of these
other countries China India and
sub-saharan Africa are really what's
going to be writing the story of the
future America has a kind of I think
like a moral obligation to lead because
historically we had the biggest carbon
footprint but at the moment were a
relatively small part of the problem and
within the US market forces are doing a
lot of or making a lot of progress for
us so the real issue is how do we figure
out a new geopolitics that forces
countries like China to act better
and one answer may be as
as it is to say that um you know Xi
Jinping is basically a dictator if he
wants to impose new standards if he
wants to invest aggressively in green
energy he doesn't have any of the opt
political obstacles that we have in the
US and so there's this sort of weird
sympathy among American climate people
for that authoritarianism and he has
especially since Trump has been elected
being a lot more aggressive up talking
about climate because he sees if America
is not going to be leading this is an
opportunity for China to be like the
real face of climate and that means
they've paid it you know
they've invested a ton in solar and wind
they've done a lot with air pollution so
Beijing used to be really awful in 2013
they more than a million Chinese people
died of air pollution and now that's
much better what have they done just
imposing stricter standards on on
pollution emissions coal plants things
like that kind of stuff you know and but
you know we think about we think about
carbon and the whole problem I think a
little too much in terms of energy
energy is just 30% of the global carbon
footprint and it's the easiest one to
solve because wind and solar is actually
really cheap now most parts of the world
is cheaper than dirty energy
what's the majority of the footprint
well it's all nothing's a majority but
so there's energy there's infrastructure
there's transportation and agriculture
is like a huge underappreciated part of
it it's something like you know 30
percent of the global footprint is it
because of tractors or everything
everything everything that you need to
do to run the farm I mean really
everything you need to do to live in the
world has some kind of carbon footprint
but you know if we were able to like
feed all our cattle seaweed that would
have like a big that would have a big
impact but all kinds of crops have have
carbon footprints and they but they
would still have to do something to get
the seaweeds and have the seaweed travel
the seaweed
yeah deliver it to these farms well you
could also do it you know you can
imagine lab-grown meat having a much
smaller carbon footprint I mean it
should if it like proceeds as we expect
it will and like I said before like when
you look at each particular threat
there's like you can see reasons for off
you can see like oh we'll figure it out
in this way we'll figure it out in that
way but the UN says we need to have all
of our global emissions by 2030 to have
a chance of averting 2 degrees of
warming which they call catastrophic
warming and the projects that we need to
put into place in those 11 years are
just much bigger than I think we're
capable of pulling off
they say the UN says what is necessary
is a global mobilization at the level of
world war 2 against climate starting
this year 2019 and there's just no
chance we're gonna do that anytime soon
I mean maybe 10 years from now we'll get
there
that may even be optimistic but the the
total decarbonisation that's required is
we need to totally zero out on carbon by
2050 they say and I just think you know
a lot of these sectors are much trickier
we could maybe zero out on energy zero
out on carbon when it comes to energy in
15 years if we wanted to but again
that's just 30% of the total problem
which is why I think there's the
negative emissions stuff the carbon
capture is so important because it will
allow us to move more slowly than the UN
says we need to and still if it works
out you know keep the planet relatively
stable relatively livable but that's you
know those technologies have been called
magical magical thinking by like the
journal Nature which is like the biggest
scientific journal writing about this
stuff so it's sort of a leap of faith to
think that they could solve that problem
do you think that we're dealing with
like shifts and degrees of perception
that it it's things like your book
things like Al Gore's movie things like
you know anytime there's a new story
that's written in the New York Times or
in any any periodical we need more of
this he needs to be hammered home to
people it needs to be something that's a
global discussion that accelerates
totally and I think that that's
happening you know I think there was
this big report the UN did in October
that spurred a lot of conversation about
and I think that in a grotesque way the
best teacher is just extreme weather you
know when you see every year these
California wildfires every year they're
burning and that is really dramatic
people I talked to in Europe are focused
on the California fires even though they
have wildfires over there they're
something with the California fires that
they're really worried about when you
see these global heat waves when you see
unprecedented hurricane seasons we just
had a typhoon in the Pacific in February
first time in recorded history
you know when every day on the news
there's some there's some you know
dramatic extreme weather and when they
come one after the other I think that's
a really powerful teaching tool so you
know there's this term it's now outdated
but five hundred year storm you hear a
lot about five hundred year storm means
you know hurricane that would hit a
particular area once every five
centuries right that means five
centuries ago there were no white people
in America so that means we're talking
about a storm that would help come once
as colonists came to America as they you
know committed genocide hence the Native
Americans as they built their own empire
stay built an empire of slaves and
cotton as they fought a civil war they
fought World War one as they fought
World War two everything that we've done
would expect one one storm of that kind
in that time hurricane Harvey was the
third 500 year storm to hit Houston in
three years we are living in such
unprecedented climate that it's
impossible to look at the news and not
learn that despite all of our
inclinations all of our reflexes to look
away I think it is seeping in I think
people are beginning to be more alarmed
about it and I think alarm is really
useful there are people in the climate
community who think you know it's it's
dangerous to scare people it turns them
off but I'm somebody who's awakened to
this out of fear and when I look at the
history of environmental activism when I
look at activism generally like we don't
try to get people to stop smoking
cigarettes by like messaging through
optimism we try to get them to stop
because we tell them how bad it's gonna
be for them drunk driving nuclear
proliferation same thing
Rachel Carson you know wrote Silent
Spring about pesticides it was called
hyperbolic alarmist it led to the
creation of the EPA and you know when
you think about that UN directive that
we should be mobilizing the scale of
World War two to combat climate we
didn't fight World War two out of hope
we fought World War two out of panic and
I think that that should be part of how
we think about this story obviously I
think you know when I look around the
world when I talk to anyone when I talk
to my family when I watch TV when I
watch moot whatever read stuff it just
seems obvious to me that there are many
more people who are still too complacent
about this issue even if they're
concerned about it a little bit even if
they're aware of it they don't think of
it as like the overarching
all-encompassing story of our time that
requires an existential response and
even saying those words make me
uncomfortable because I like it's hard
it's hard for me to believe that this
skit the threat is that big but that is
what the science says and like I said
before some of that science is not gonna
get borne out but when you look at the
full scope of it and just how just how
large just how bleak the impacts will be
you realize like we really need to wake
up to just how dangerous a world we're
heading into and do everything we can to
avoid it in addition to probably
planning to adapt now you live in New
York were you living in New York when
Tribeca flooded a few years ago yeah
what was that like well I mean I think
in a situation like that most people
emerge from a particular disaster and
think my god since this is so awful it
must be an anomaly and you know I think
New York was really horrified as a city
by Sandy but there's gonna be Sandy's I
remember the exact stat like once every
five years but this category storm was
sandy I think it made landfall as a
category three so it's not even a five
yeah so if a five hitting is it possible
for a five to hit New York is it too far
north
no it's possible totally possible I was
talking to a really prominent climate
scientist a few months ago who is like
one of the he was one of the lead author
on the UN report lives in New York does
a lot of consulting with the city and I
said so we're gonna build a seawall to
protect New York from flooding and he
was like oh absolutely you know
Manhattan real estate it's way too
expensive
to let flood so we'll definitely build a
seawall but an infrastructure project
like that takes at least 30 years to
build and if we started right now we
wouldn't be able to finish in time to
save Howard Beach in parts of Brooklyn
and Queens if we started right now he
said he said the city knows this and
you'll see in the next few years they'll
stop doing repairs on infrastructure
they'll stop attending to the subway
lines in those neighborhoods and even a
few years after that they'll start
staying explicitly to the people who
live there you might be able to continue
living in these homes for a couple
decades but you're not going to be able
to live them leave them to your kids
whoa this is in New York City it's like
the richest country in the world and
yeah huge parts of huge parts of
southern Brooklyn and Queens are going
to be underwater so for the people that
live there right now what parts are you
talking about well the one that the one
that he mentioned most explicitly was
Howard Beach but which is its kind of an
inch it's like a mob neighborhood and
you know it's still yeah really well
yeah yeah see because that was like the
gaudy neighborhood right yeah that's
where they buried all about dead bodies
Wow I didn't know that was still a mob
neighborhood well you know to the extent
that there is a mob yeah and yeah I mean
that's true everywhere on the coast
everywhere it's not just New York New
York is not exceptional right you know
their projections that like 30 billion
dollars of New Jersey real estate could
be underwater by 2030 2035 is alarming I
was born in New Jersey yeah it's not as
alarming and then you know Miami Beach
is you know Miami Beach is done for yeah
Miami Beach is almost inevitable correct
yeah yeah I mean you know they could
they could build a seawall but that
doesn't help because of the ground right
and and it's just so expensive so you
really have to you really have to pick
your poison and then when you look
around the world you know
it's like Bangladesh that country is
gonna be almost entirely underwater
that's hundreds of millions of people if
we want it to build a seawall they can't
afford that
who's gonna afford who's gonna pay for
that and this is all because of the
raising sea level because of the melting
ice because of the temperature and all
this is happening and I think you know
we think of sea level is really a thing
that happens on the coastline which it
is primarily but it also increases
flooding on rivers because the water is
all connected of course
so flooding in the UK is expected to
grow 50 fold by the end of the century
what
well that life default London is already
like under water a couple times a year I
mean not the whole city but is this
Jamie this is Bangladesh I just went 200
that's under watch jeez oh my god these
people are fucked
yes there's 18 million residents live
here that's a swamp yeah that looks
crazy like it look if you are a real
estate projector and you're flying over
that yeah yeah yeah we can't build here
yeah Jakarta will be totally underwater
those apartment buildings like you could
see the water level look back up a
little bit this is just a running little
oh but if you see look at like doesn't
that look like a water level and the
apartment buildings on the right-hand
side and your where your cursor is yeah
like like that's gonna go up to where
that orange level is fuckin Christ
well I mean over millenia we're gonna
rise hundreds of feet Oh God I mean it's
gonna take a long time so you can adjust
that a little bit but but that's always
been the case right the the the I mean
they're still fine they find these
artifacts and things in the middle of
the ocean yeah areas where people used
to be able to live and now they can't
live anymore yeah I think that'll be we
have to move people have to move so
what's a good spot Alberta
anyway anywhere anywhere off the Benton
yes the spot now I mean I think I would
like that all the time and I say you
know honestly the place that I would
move to is somewhere in Scandinavia
really because um you know I talked
about the impacts of economic growth
before but they're gonna be parts of the
world that benefit economically from
this anywhere in the north so Canada
Russia and Scandinavia will benefit
because why don't go to Scandinavia go
to candidates right there well that's
look prettier to me yeah skins Navy is
nice but Candace like our neighbors
although they also yeah they have
wildfires there to Canada and that's the
end to in the Arctic Circle in Finland
bears
yeah and outlines but so you know these
guys the economists who study this stuff
say that there is actually an optimal
temperature for human productivity it's
13 degrees Celsius which is the
historical median temperature of the US
it's also the historical median
temperature of Germany what is 13
Celsius was about sixty degrees or
something now yeah I think it's like in
the high 50s all right whenever I'm in
Canada always like I don't know what
you're saying
yeah it's 22 degrees 55 point one and so
for every degree north of that you lose
about a percentage point of GDP so the
u.s. is now at about 13 and a half
degrees Celsius at our median
temperature that means that we're losing
about a half percentage point of GDP
every year from it but there are parts
of the US that were cooler than 13 and
are now brought up to this optimal level
Silicon Valley is like exactly at 13
degrees right now which is you know
notable because they're like super
productive yeah and that's gonna be so
that'll be true for Scandinavian
generally and it may be part of the
explanation why there's been so much
economic productivity in Scandinavia
over the last generation is that they
have already started doing better with
temperature crops are gonna be more
bountiful in Russia like Russia will
have better agriculture because of
global warming which is why they they
make such a you know they're such a
complicated figure in the geopolitical
story about climate so they are a Petro
state they have almost all their
economic tivity activity has to do with
burning oil but they're also poised to
benefit from warming so they're doubly
motivated to produce more global warming
Wow and they have such a fuck that we're
at rest of the world perspective that
they're not going to stop whereas Canada
probably they're like likely to even
though they'd benefit from more warming
they'll probably get on board with any
program to avert warming but that is a
that's a dilemma that faces every nation
you know like Justin Trudeau gets you
know talks
a lot of shit about Donald Trump in his
climate policy but he Justin Trudeau is
also approving new pipelines Angela
Merkel does the same but she's retiring
nuclear so quickly in Germany that
they're having to use dirty energy and
even though they've had this incredible
green energy revolution there their
emissions are going up and every country
in the world is it's a collective action
problem every country in the world is
incentivized to behave badly and let the
rest of the world clean up the mess so I
was talking this guy yesterday about
wildfires and he was like you know
California is doing so great you know
with all of the emission standards
they're basically you know holding
themselves to the Paris Accords even
though the country as a whole isn't but
that impact isn't local
its global so it's dissipated the
temperature impact on California
wildfires will be determined by it like
I said earlier basically what China does
so in terms of you know what any
individual area what any any individual
nation is doing the motivations are
really really complicated there and in
California in particular this is a bit
of a tangent but you know you the state
has done incredible stuff with emission
standards fuel efficiency green energy
and yet all of those gains now are wiped
out every year by the fires because
fires are trees trees are burning trees
are basically coal in the sense that
they are stored carbon when they burn
they release carbon into the atmosphere
so every time there are wildfires like
there were last year in California
it literally wipes out all of the
progress that the state made in all of
its green initiatives that year yeah
and you know about in in in in Brazil
that the president Brazil wants to like
basically DeForest the Amazon the Amazon
is responsible for something like 30
percent of the world's oxygen and is a
huge sub all plants obviously absorb
carbon and produce oxygen so plant life
is really good for fighting climate
change when you say he wants a DeForest
yeah
the Amazon at what scale what does he
what is he talking about doing so the
scientist who studies his proposal say
that his plans
would be the equivalent of adding over a
10-year period adding a second China to
the world's global footprint Jesus
Christ yeah and this is just a pump up
Brazil's economy yeah well he has a kind
of a Trump be like I'm gonna fuck that
environmentalists perspective too so
he's just like a little bit like you
know whatever flipping a bird to people
who care about it and that just makes
you think that like it seems crazy now
but it really won't be crazy I think a
generation from now for another country
to threaten at least sanctions and maybe
military action to deal with that you
know after World War two we built a
whole liberal international order around
the principle of human rights that would
have been unthinkable in the 20s and yet
it led to a series of military invent
interventions over the next half century
because people were behaving badly
towards their own citizens if we could
do that it doesn't seem all that crazy
to me that say thirty years from now a
an empowered Imperial China looking at
someone like Boston ro and Brazil would
just be like no you can't do that I'm
just gonna we're just gonna go in and
like take you out yeah and this is what
I mean when I say it's a kind of all
encompassing all impacting threat our
politics will be shaped by it
our geopolitics will be shaped by it our
you know our everything will be shaped
by it
we could have climate wars like in the
not-too-distant future Jesus Christ how
is this being received the book yeah are
people people resisting it is there
anybody that wants to debate you on this
so I you know I wrote this article a
couple years ago that produced I mean it
was a huge sort of viral phenomenon but
it produced also some scientific
criticism and you know we published a
fully annotated version where every
single lot we showed where every single
line came from but there were still
scientists who were arguing about
whether the messaging was precisely
calibrated whether it was too bleak too
dark the book has had none of that
I mean it's first of all it's been the
best at first week it was on The Times
bestseller list number six bestseller in
England it's been in the Amazon top ten
and all of the reviews have been really
kind
I think this goes to what you were
saying before I think like the
conversation is changing people are
actually really interested in talking
seriously about just how big a deal this
is in a way that they might not have
been just a year ago where is the
resistance though is there any
resistance to it right now
to the bus well not just the book but
just the concept in general 73 percent
of Americans believe climate change is
real 70 percent of Americans are
concerned about it those numbers are up
15 percent since 2015 who are the 27
that don't I mean I think it's you know
it's aren't right-wingers yeah yeah but
you know those numbers are we live in a
we live in a culture now where like most
people's worldview passes through a
prism of partisan politics so like you
know there's amazing studies that show
that in the night in the early 90s there
was no partisan divide between on the
question of whether OJ Simpson was
guilty when you control for race
Republicans and Democrats had the same
idea about OJ Simpson's guilt that is
totally unthinkable today and there's
now a huge partisan split on whether 12
years of slave deserves an Oscar
partisanship has like totally taken over
our minds such that the fact that we
have 73 percent of Americans who believe
global warming is real and happening to
me that's a really fucking high number
actually because one of the two parts I
don't think that the Republican Party is
really any more a denier party I think
they're just a party of skeptics and
self-interest they want to like look out
for business interests which actually
the calculus there is changing which
I'll talk about in a second but people
don't want to believe that horrifying
things are real because who would it's
terrifying but 73 percent of the country
that's a lot I mean that's you know
that's more support than there is for
just about anything so I'm like
basically and the speed at which that
those numbers have grown is really
dramatic I said 15 points since 2015 8
points just since March has moved out
that's incredible and I do think that
the economic logic is really powerful
here so it used to be the case that
there was economic conventional wisdom
that action on climate was going to be
really expensive because you require
massive upfront investment and it would
also foregoing economic growth but all
of the new research the last couple
years reverses that logic totally so
there was a big report 2018 that said
that we could add twenty six trillion
dollars to the global economy through
rapid decarbonisation by just 2030 we
could avoid all of these horrible six
hundred trillion dollar impacts that
we're talking about if we decarbonize
rapidly and there are also obviously
business opportunities there they're
whole solar empires to build their whole
new electric grid to build so if the
economic conventional wisdom is now that
fast action on climate is better for the
economy than slow action on climate that
hasn't yet totally taken over the
perspective of our policymakers globally
but I think it will soon and when it
does I think that we'll see like a real
sea change in in their perspective
because I think for a long time even
people who cared about climate thought
well I want to do something but if I
have to like cost some people some jobs
and cost like a percentage point of
economic growth that's not worth it let
me just kick the can down the road this
is a slow-moving phenomenon well invent
our way out of it we'll grow our way out
of it but all the new research says like
let's get started right now and we'll
see how that plays out I mean if we
really have to have global emissions by
2030 it means really really aggressive
action which I don't think is possible
but I do think that we'll see much more
aggressive action in the decade ahead
than we've had in the decades in the
past so you think that once there's
financial incentive for people to either
some sort of an industry that reduces
carbon or something along those lines
industries that are working to mitigate
global warming that once there's a
financial sort of benefit for those
people to innovate and to move forward
with this that that's we're going to see
real change
yeah well also that um I mean direct
investment of particular companies but
also you know government leaders who
look around and say if the economic
picture is going to be better ten years
from now if we make massive investments
in green energy then it would be and and
even like past laws you know regulating
say fuel efficiency
or even banning internal combustion
engines which i think will happen within
a couple decades if that's gonna be if
the economic picture taking that path is
much rosier than the economic picture of
inaction I think they'll go down the
path of action right and you know again
the question is how aggressively how
quickly and in what form but I do think
that you know I do think the incentives
will be different five years from now
than they looked five years ago and
that'll be that'll be huge so that that
you think would be a great motivator for
people to shift their perceptions and
particularly right-wing folks may be
amongst the 27% that are in denial yeah
well I mean if you look around the world
denial is not really a problem anywhere
but the u.s. there's a little bit of an
in the UK but it's a totally American
phenomenon and when you understand that
the u.s. is only 15 percent of all
global emissions is that's just typical
American arrogance like what do you
think is the the root of that uh I think
it's it's basically bad behavior by the
oil companies
I mean they've like put out really
aggressive disinformation and denial you
ever see the movie merchants of doubt'
yeah yeah perfect example that right
yeah totally yeah and I know that the
people who wrote the book - who are
really really great and you know it's
especially horrifying because in the 60s
and 70s that the oil companies were like
doing some of the most ambitious
research on climate so they're you know
then they ended up suppressing that
going forward but they knew shit about
how the planet was going to change
before any of the rest of us really yes
no alternatives back then and there was
no real emission standard so like this
that's when catalytic converters started
being enacted yeah well you know
somewhere around then if we had started
decarbonization in 2000 which is just
coincidentally was the year that Al Gore
won the popular vote for president we
would have had to globally cut emissions
by about three percent per year to get
below two degrees we're now at a spot
where we have to cut them by about 10
percent per year and if we wait another
decade we're gonna have to cut them by
30 percent per year which is like an
unthinkable rate so we wouldn't have had
to take such aggressive action if we had
started early we would have had to just
be doing
kind of on the margins changes but we're
now in a situation where the problem is
way too big for that and there are
people who want to talk about the
solutions that could have been useful 20
years ago now talking about the carbon
tax is like one quite popular thing to
talk about the UN says that in order to
be effective the carbon a global carbon
tax would need to be perhaps as high as
fifty five hundred dollars a tonne and
there's nowhere else in the world
there's nowhere in the world where
there's tax that's even 1/100 as high as
that right now and the places in the
world where they do have carbon tax is
everybody's emissions are still grow up
going up so there there was a time when
like the kind of like you don't have to
change anything we'll just like fiddle
on the margins here could have worked if
we had taken if we had really been
focused on it but we're sort of past
that point now unfortunately but it's
interesting you know that the talking
about the oil companies
I think they you know I think they're
responsible for denial but I also think
that denial is not all that important in
American politics because when you look
around the world you see many countries
which very with very different politics
even quite universally focused on
climate issues who are not behaving any
better when it comes to carbon than we
are and so you think well what is the
sickness here is that the Republican
Party and their climate denial or is it
the fact that all of us just want you
know more better cheaper stuff and we
have a really hard time conceiving of
different paths that don't push us for
towards more consumption and you know
more more of the modern amenities that
we sort of assume will keep accumulating
over time I mean people say financial
capitalism is the problem I have some
sympathy for that view but I also look
around the world I see social
democracies who are behaving really
poorly when it comes to carbon I see
socialist countries who are behaving
really poorly when it comes to carbon it
seems on some level like it's even
deeper than the systems that we have to
organize and manage our cultural
priorities and there are now you know
getting back to the villany of the oil
companies there now all these lawsuits
that are being brought against them for
basically on the model of the the
cigarette companies like that for
climate damages and that may be they may
be victorious they may put some of these
companies out of business I think it's
not that
but it's possible there are also other
lawsuits that are happening that are
really interesting there's one in the
Netherlands that some people held the
Dutch government it basically the Dutch
government was not honoring the Paris
Accords and citizens sued to hold them
to that and were won the case so the
Dutch government is now obligated
legally to do better on climate than
they were doing on their own and in the
US there's this amazing Court case
called Juliana first the United States
which is a lawsuit being brought by kids
using this kind of ingenious use of the
Equal Protection Clause they're arguing
that their generation has been exposed
to climate damages that they're the
previous generation their parents
generation were protected from and so
they're saying this climate policy is a
violation of the Equal Protection Clause
you're not protecting us in the same way
that you protected our parents that's at
the district court in Oregon which is
just one level below the Supreme Court I
think it'll win in the district court
almost certainly won't win at the
Supreme Court but if it did win in the
Supreme Court it would immediately
obligate the u.s. to a totally
maximalist climate policy because it's
literally impossible to protect the next
generation from climate damages as fully
as the previous generation was but
they'd be obligated to do everything
they could
which would mean sort of suddenly
something like the the world war two
scale mobilization that the UN calls for
which would be really kind of dramatic
and credible and I think that's one path
forward is through litigation because so
many places in the world it's not just
politics are inert like American
politics are inert it's just there's a
lot of slow-moving bureaucracy and
slow-moving public opinion and in the
same way that a lot of civil rights
victories were fought and won in the
courts I think we might be able to make
some progress in the courts on climate
to we'll see if you had a magic wand if
they made you the king of the world
mm-hmm and they said you you can decide
what we do what would the first step be
the first step is just ending fossil
fuel subsidies I mean there's no reason
why these companies should be receiving
public money and why are they just
incumbency advantages they're
well-connected companies a lot of them
are really big and powerful and any
government in the world is not going to
a major industry to like completely
collapse but you know if we're really
subsidizing them five trillion dollars a
year that's a ton of money that could be
poured into green it like 2 rd of new
technology it could be poured into
carbon capture like we talked about
before that's just unbelievable resource
and it would accelerate the decline of
coal in particular and and other oil
other fossil fuel businesses which would
be great is there any discussion about
that in individual countries yeah but
it's slow-moving you know there's stuff
about people are taking action in all
different ways at all different levels
which i think is basically necessary so
there are cities in Europe where cars
are now being banned cars yeah in the
city yeah just like riding around yeah
you've been living in LA too long you
can do that in Amsterdam you can do that
it just seems ridiculous yeah well I
mean I think maybe maybe it'll just be
you can only have an electric car hmm
you know maybe 10 years from now like
it'll be illegal in the u.s. to build
like a you know a gas guzzling car I got
an electric car recently and it's
amazing the blowback from my friends
what is missing well first of all it's
always homophobic or or or feminine yeah
they're always going after you about
your estrogen levels and your manhood
it's like it's weird it's kind of like a
space I mean Tesla's are kind of like
they're kind of like spaceships though
they feel I mean that there's what have
you been in one yeah you driven one I
haven't driven one everyone yeah I drove
in one years ago and I wasn't that
impressed I want to say like maybe five
or six years ago but now I have one of
the new ones that's crazy fast yeah it
doesn't even make sense
regular cars are stupid yeah they're
stupid and you spend all that money on
gas what would you want to do yeah but I
mean they're stupid like they don't work
as good like that thing is way better
than any car I've ever driven yeah it's
only gonna get better there they don't
even make sense how fast they are and
they drive themselves yeah like you hit
this little thing go do do and it just
fucking steers it takes over yeah like
it drives yeah and it's it stays within
the speed limit and you could just kind
of half-ass spaced out cuz keep your
hand on the steer
well and it uh it breaks when his cars
in front of you and slow it's very
strange it will even change lanes for
you amazing it's fucked it's weird it's
weird it's very difficult to let go and
to give in like that but the strange
thing that I felt was the the blowback
from my friends yeah like and they're
joking around obviously most of my
friends are comedians but it's it's
hilarious have heckled me about yeah
well I feel it like I just at the
aesthetic level I understand that
mocking of like the Prius but I feel
like the Tesla is actually a little
macho you know yeah well the piece is a
piece of shit it's like a cheese way
yeah
wheels yeah but I mean it's like you
know yeah we live in a sick culture
we're like being like we're healthy and
responsible it's like it was like
cigarettes and whiskey yeah mock someone
eating a salad yeah it's very weird it
is very weird but I was that is an
American problem like other parts in the
world data they're not as attached yeah
their trucks and gross yeah we're gross
but but there's something particularly
strange about being on that side of it
because I was I want to I don't want to
say I was pessimistic about electric
cars but when Elon did the podcast I
told my Bob one of his cars yeah he was
telling me how the great theremin yeah
yeah yeah I'm PI one of your cars but I
really did not expect to like it as much
as I do and then once I got it I was
like okay now I get it yeah but then I
was thinking about my own resistance to
it because I like cars I have you know
muscle cars I have a couple of an older
Porsche I love them yeah they're fun I
like those kind of cars but they're
stupid they really are dumb that's a
dumb way to get around the Tesla is a
way better way to get around yeah and
you know he's got one that's coming out
in 2020 that's gonna have a six hundred
and sixty mile range which is insane I
mean he drive all the way to San
Francisco and back with you now I mean
he's incredible I think you know I like
there there are reasons why he gets the
shit that he gets but I also think like
Tesla and SolarCity are incredibly
important and I'm actually I don't
understand why there aren't more people
in Silicon Valley who are focused on
climate in this way like obviously
like these are people who see themselves
as gods who want to be world historical
figures they're there literally do that
who do you think is doing that well like
like Jeff you think he thinks himself as
a god yeah really yeah really
you don't know I read those text
messages he said to that chick I don't
think God would say that but you know
God would say you should be lucky to get
this dick all the space exploration
stuff though it's like you know all like
people are obsessed resent the life
extension extension but don't you think
that that's just a side effect of having
150 billion dollars so you could do so
much good with that yes so Bezos is
pouring a billion dollars a year into
his into his space exploration project
which is like I mean I'm excited by
space too I think it'd be cool to go up
there but there's some pressing problems
here which we could really benefit you
know that money could really benefit and
I agree but long-term I think the
philosophy is that we're gonna have to
get off this planet if the human race is
going to succeed but as of not just the
threat of global warming but of tax yeah
minutes factors it's an asteroid thing I
think I mean for Novas
yeah there's a lot of factors mark on
the particular question of climate
there's just no way that the earth is
gonna get as inhospitable as Mars is so
the idea of building a colony there as a
hedge against global warming it's just
crazy we could it is ridiculous why I'm
a good on the positive note if we could
fix that shithole yeah like imagine what
we could do here yeah paradise
yeah well the idea is terraforming right
they go there with some kind of massive
machine that's gonna create oxygen and
the environment and yeah well it's a
good place to practice cuz no one lives
there so you could do all kinds of goofy
shit and go well good news and bad news
the good news is we figured out a way to
terraform the bad news is we already
fucked up Mars so we're gonna try
another spot we're gonna go to you know
we're gonna move on Uranus yeah yeah
well you know Venus used to be actually
quite earth-like yeah they went through
a really rapid global warming yeah that
made it now it's like a total hellhole
right and that's like this sort of worst
case worst case for Earth is the Venus
scenario well ultimately the sun's gonna
burn out right look at what that's many
millions of years sure but if we really
do look into the future something
something has to be done you know
this is the on the grandest of grand
scales the the concept of some sort of
interstellar arcs I mean I believe that
I'm and I'm I'm with it I just think the
timescale of the threat that work that
we need to avert by space exploration
that's a timescale of millennia yes we
have a lot of new technology to develop
over the next thousand years that will
allow us to do it better and more
efficiently but climate change the time
scale is like the next 30 years right so
we need to focus on it now know to give
ourselves the opportunity to do the
other show why do you think it's sexier
to go to space is that what it is like
rockets and I mean I think for these
dudes yeah yeah it's a big metal dick
yeah I didn't often the atmosphere
that's what we're doing I've had a fuck
space I actually made that argument
about Mars yeah it's like they're shaped
like dicks yeah something to that yeah
well also in this generation of people
really grew up in the in the age of like
the space race yeah I mean it's um and
the aftermath of landing on the moon and
I think there is like Peter Thiel talks
about this there's this kind of
unfulfilled sense of future that we all
like anybody who grew up in the post-war
years in the 67th they were like you
know whatever his famous line we're
promised flying cars and all we got was
140 characters or whatever and I think
that applies to the space exploration
stuff is like well the government is no
longer doing the really ambitious shit
right but we can do it privately on the
other hand there is a government in the
world that is doing that shit in China
they just land it on the far side of the
Moon they're doing really aggressive
space exploration and I haven't been
there in 20 years but the people I know
who lived there say there is so much
faith in the future they're they just
believe in a very inherent deep down way
that like the future will be better and
sci-fi II in an exciting way and that's
so far and from the way that Americans
think about the future
is that part of the benefit of having a
dictator run things I think it's just
like they're on a huge upswing right so
like there's no debate about how things
get done yeah yeah totally I mean that's
what I was saying before it's like it
gives you some hope for climate if like
Xi Jinping is just like okay immediately
no more coal mm-hmm they'll all stop you
know but he's also throwing two million
Muslims and concentration camps right
umm this Bezos thing I mean I'm not
criticizing you because I think it's a
very common thought but why is it that
we look at these super-rich billion
billionaire characters that are on the
top of the heap why do we think of them
as like having these tremendous egos and
looking like gods isn't it sort of just
that's just how you're always gonna look
at someone who lives in a 100 million
dollar house and it's possible I think
when you look at I mean not to get to
like armchair psychology I think that
Bezos but when you look at the physical
transformation that he's put himself
through when you think about like the
life extension what has he done
physically he's just like I mean if you
if you look at photos of him when he's
like a young man he's you know just kind
of like dweeby right and now he's like
um an action hero
is he really yeah I mean maybe not like
you but he's like he's yeah he's pretty
this is Bezos jacked am I missing
something
let me show ya it looks different Google
pull up pull up some marriages of Jeff
Bezos jacked I didn't know but he got a
trainer I mean no I'm not blaming him
but that's only one part of it I would
say bigger than that is you know the the
high just how thin-skinned on the worlds
okay let me say zoom in oh I guess he's
got some arms yeah there is oh wow
that's a big difference
he's also got a vest on I guess his arms
do look pretty big yeah I mean I'm not
I'm in most ways I'm not a business
hater I think Amazon has been actually
really pretty great I'm a fan yeah I
like will listen to the guy talk and I
loved his letter to the National
Enquirer there he is right there yeah so
he looks fit yeah in front of the King
Kong rampage movie yeah that him yeah he
looks pretty good okay I guess physical
transformation but that's yeah probably
life extension like you're uploading
your brain to the computer it's somebody
busy into that ship he is actually I
think not as into it to some other
people but that is so sci-fi you know I
I interviewed Kurzweil a while back when
I was doing the sci-fi show and I went
to this 2045 conference that they had in
Manhattan and it was
these guys are they're talking about
something that they think will be
invented and they're acting as if it's
been invented inevitable yeah yeah
totally I mean Eric Schmidt has said
about climate change that the solution
is already here in the sense that AI
will just solve it like that what no
that's that's a weird thing that we do
though right we always looked like Oh
someone's gonna handle this
yeah well the brain upload stuff is
interesting to me with regard to climate
just because it's like a portal through
which we can escape environmental
degradation so if the world is on fire
and full of suffering maybe we can just
upload our minds to some machines and
not not live in the real world anymore
right and when I think about even my
relationship to my phone like tech
addiction generally we're sort of being
taught to think of the world on our
screens as more real than the world
that's around us and that sounds in a
lot of ways like decline a stand or
whatever but I also think it may be a
kind of coping mechanism for a world
that we're about to head into where
there is that much more suffering and
when I when I see for instance like the
whole wellness movement I think their
intuitions they are about like the
toxicity of the world and how we have to
avoid it I think the way that it'll
reshape our own sense of self and
relationship to the world and idea of
our place in nature and history all of
these things are really up in the air
and we'll be affected by climate change
I think in you know in ways that we
don't yet appreciate or understand so
the to wave the wand yeah what would be
step number one step number one is
ending fossil fuel subsidies and fossil
fuel subsidies number two step number
two just massive R&D investment a
massive investment in R&D and new
infrastructure this would be great for
the economy right totally so all these
things taking a positive or taking a
negative and looking at positive aspects
of mitigating the problem yeah and yeah
new energy sources I mean that you know
you there really there are already new
business empires that were are from the
climate change era there are new solar
empires there
wind empires but that can happen
globally that needs to happen globally
and you know that's you know then we
have to we have to deal with agriculture
which maybe about seaweed and maybe
about lab-grown meat I don't know but
you know it's it's like the big picture
it's all carbon it's all just how much
carbon we put into the atmosphere so I
think it will come to be the case that
in the decades ahead
everything about the way that we
interact with the world will be
described and understood in terms of
carbon so that for instance you walk
down the aisle in the supermarket see
organic food you see non-gmo food you'll
also see like carbon free food and
that'll be a big part of the way that we
consume everything that things will be
advertised that way promote it that way
but globally we just need to really
focus on reducing carbon it's a like and
wherever it is which is almost
everywhere we need to figure out new
ways to do whatever it is we're doing
that's that's causing that problem we
need to make it trendy in LA I do have
some organic gluten-free carbon free
food I feel like that's already kind of
a should be yeah that would be as long
as that kicks in and people realize
there's some street cred to being carbon
free yeah I mean I think in different
parts of the world people will relate
differently to it so like yeah in China
they're scheduled to have this huge boom
in beef consumption and dairy
consumption because it's expected that
as that country gets richer the people
will adopt a more Western diet hmm but
it's also possible that they won't that
like the new Chinese middle class will
be still really interested in you know
tofu less interested in beef less
interested in milk they are they you
know and it might be it might be easier
to have them follow that path and it
will be to make the American average
American eat less beef but you know it's
it's everywhere it's like everywhere you
look there's some there's some problem
little problem to solve
but then when you pull back it really is
just carbon it's like absolutely
everything if you think about everything
you do in terms of the carbon impact it
has then you know the solutions to
suggest themselves and I do think that
in the coming decades if even if you and
I don't start to think in those terms
our policymakers well that like
everything will be we're entering into a
new trade agreement with Japan what's
the carbon budget here like what caused
their carbon behavior oh we're like you
know this we're providing some public
subsidies for this Factory
over here what's there like a mission
situation like can we ask them to bring
along some carbon capture plants so that
they reduce their footprint you know
every at every level the level of the
individual like talking about buying a
Tesla or buying a you know buying a
Range Rover or whatever I think we'll
start to think in in the term in terms
of carbon and that'll be a sign of just
how total climate change will have how
totally climate change will have
conquered the world so that there won't
be an aspect of modern life that will be
not just untouched but in a certain way
kind of uncovered by it yeah what about
is there a way to educate people in a
way that's not preachy that sort of
moves the needle in that direction I
think conversations like this are
important I think your books very
important and I think you know
interviews that I'm sure you're doing
right now on all these different shows
are important and everything kind of
like ups the needle or are just the
perception of it a little bit but is
there anything else it can be done that
can educate people in a way that's it's
not preachy or it's not it's not
aggressive in a way that annoys people
because yeah it's a horrible thing to
say but anyway we're like we need sugar
in the medicine you know like yeah the
song from Mary Poppins yeah I mean I
think in general like climate message
and climate communication has really
suffered for a long time because it was
so preachy and because it was so holier
than now and because the people that get
involved and it part of the reason why
they get involved in it's for virtue
signal totally and I've been asked like
you know as I've been permanent
promoting the book by a lot of people
like what have you done to in your life
to change
and it's like well I'm flying a little
bit less the flying really makes me feel
guilty but otherwise I basically haven't
changed anything because I do think that
politics and policy are the most
important impact you can have and I'm
like spreading the word whether I either
like a couple fewer hamburgers a year it
just doesn't really matter that much but
the idea that you would ask a newcomer
to the movement to demonstrate their
commitment by making themselves the most
optimally committed that they possibly
could be that's just gonna alienate so
many people and this is obviously a
issue where we need more people engaged
in a more direct profound way so I think
for me it's like anyone who wants to
care about climate who wants to vote
about climate like come on like you know
and I think that you know Hollywood can
be really important here I mean since
I've been out here I've been have a
couple meetings about shows and stuff
and I do think that we've had really
corny storytelling about climate change
and that there are actually
opportunities for like really incredible
new kinds of storytelling I mean in the
book I write about this story that
happened a couple years ago where you
know anthrax that was had killed a
reindeer in Russia in the early 20th
century the reindeer was frozen in
permafrost for the entire 20th century
permafrost melted the reindeer thawed
the anthrax was released and killed at
least one boy in a number of other
reindeer in Russia Wow and that is true
so in the ice in the Arctic ice our you
know we know of rock is like a record of
geological history ice is also record of
geological history so they're like the
bubonic plague is trapped in ice that
the Spanish flew in from 1918 that
killed hundreds of millions of people is
trapped in ice there are diseases
trapped in the Arctic ice from before
humans were around which means that
humans immune system have no experience
with them there's so many horror movies
you can make about this subject holy
shit I don't even think of that I didn't
know that the Spanish flu is trapped in
ice yeah I mean and there have been
instances where like in lab conditions
anyway they've revived bacteria that are
millions of years old
one Russian doctor literally injected a
bacteria that he had revived from like
35,000 years ago had been frozen for
35,000 years he brought it back to life
and injected it into himself why would
he do that just to see what would have
thats a fucking Marvel comic book that's
how you become like the Red Skull or
some shit yeah well that's what I mean
about this this story is so big it's
like the world that we live in in the
next couple of decades will be
completely transformed like we will be
reading about diseases coming out of the
Arctic ice we will be reading about
tropical diseases arriving in Copenhagen
because now mosquitoes are there because
the temperature allows them to live
there in a way that they never lived
before we will be reading about climate
conflict we'll be reading about you know
I mean all this shit it's it's it's
everywhere it you know air pollution
increases the rates of autism and ADHD
it changes the development of babies in
utero it's like it's all-encompassing
Wow
the disease and the ice thing is really
freaking me out I never even considered
that yeah but that is something to think
about along with the methane and carbon
it's gonna be emitted into the
atmosphere as it melts well let me tell
you the story so there we now so there
was there this species of antelope
called a Saiga antelope they they're
mostly in Siberia they're kind of dwarf
antelopes and they've been around for
millions of years and all of a sudden in
2016 or 2015 they literally all died
it's called a Megadeth the entire
species died they're extinct they're now
extinct Jesus and that happened because
a bacteria that had been living inside
their guts was changed by temperature
conditions it was none usually hot
unusually humid summer and this bacteria
that had been living inside them
presumably for millions of years
comfortably as a kind of peaceful
cooperator became a killer and killed
the entire species now we have inside us
countless bacteria and viruses
scientists believe millions in air
human so our guts are full of bacteria
that do our digestion for us they
monitor our moods they're there you know
there are some scientists who think it's
really misleading to even think of the
human as a unitary animal rather than a
kind of composite creature little system
yeah and most of those bacteria and
viruses are not going to be dramatically
transformed by a degree or two degrees
of warming but there's so many of them
the chances that one could it's hard to
dismiss that and whether that would mean
we'd all immediately go extinct probably
not but what if that means suddenly
schizophrenia increases by 15% because
schizophrenia is related to a bacterial
infection called Toxoplasma Guidance
bacteria Toxoplasma gondii well that's
that cat parasite yeah exactly
schizophrenia is related to that yeah
really yeah it's like triples your
chances of getting six different Wow
yeah and our bodies are so complex such
intricate ecosystems like you say that
if one little thing gets disturbed it
could have really catastrophic impacts
on us and that's true of the planet as a
whole
I think that's big that's one of the big
lessons of my book is that this is such
a delicate system it's been stable for
all of human history and now it's not
stable what that means for how we live
we don't know yet but the changes will
be significant will be profound but it's
also true of the individual you know our
bodies will be living differently in a
world that's two degrees warmer than
they are today we can't really predict
what those impacts will be but it could
be quite dramatic and they could be
things that we can't even imagine today
because they're you know by some counts
millions of bacteria inside us that we
haven't even identified yet Jesus Christ
you're freaking me out David goddamnit
it's a crazy world out there well it not
just crazy but it seems like when you're
talking about things like this we
talking about climate change affecting
our actual gut parasites or gut biome
and that this literally could change the
way human beings behave I mean these are
all things that I've never heard
discussed and it it just it's really
terrifying really is you know I mean and
part of the problem is people here like
I'll relax everything's fine this is
this constant thing that we do where if
it's not
affecting us currently right now in the
moment there's not a fire in front of us
we don't worry about it it's a weird
compartment compartmentalization thing
that human beings do yeah and it's you
know we you think that evolution would
have trained us differently you think
that evolution would have trained us
over time to have at least some
long-term capacity and I guess we do
have some long-term planning capacity
but it's we choose to think in really
short term ways just about all the time
now you've already freaked me out
how's your book and it freaked me out
more
I mean it's every page every page is
more of this yeah Jesus man how do you
sleep at night you okay I mean I sleep
through compartmentalization and denial
- I'm not I'm not you know I mentioned
earlier like that and I think it's been
a problem for environmentalism for a
long time that's kind of holier than a
thing that's not who I am I'm not an
environmentalist until a couple years
ago when I started really worrying about
this stuff I had the same disinclination
to take it seriously than that most
people do you know I thought climate
change was real I thought it was
something that we need to worry about
and deal with but I thought it was like
a small problem that could be dealt with
without much change to my life and I
still basically feel that way I mean I
you know I'd like going on vacations in
nature but I'm not someone who's like
spends months hiking that trail or
whatever I've never even had a pet I
don't love animals you know but my the
more I looked at the science the more I
just realized this isn't about affecting
some part of nature over there
it's about affecting all of human life
every aspect of human life as it's lived
on this planet and that really terrified
me but even knowing that even staring at
it straight in the face I mean I still
get up in the morning and you know
whatever do the same shit go to the gym
watch basketball go to my day job and I
don't think that we should be ashamed of
that I think all of us have are gonna
have different reactions to this story
different perspectives on the crisis and
that's good that's human but spreading
the word generally making people a
little more alarmed is gonna make people
take some more action and that's what we
need but you know
the psychological article biases are so
strong that like when I imagine my
daughter's life I'm not imagining a
hellscape I'm imagining the life the
world that I grew up in right and again
that's not like that's how everybody
that's how everybody reads relates to
the world and it's just a reminder of
how important it is to look really
directly at the science because the
world as it exists today is not a good
guide to the world that we will be
living in in a decade or two there's no
way that the climate system as it exists
today will be stabilized forever it will
get hotter all of these things will get
worse every tick upward of temperature
will make will create more climate
suffering somewhere in the world and if
we get to really dramatic levels of
warming that suffering will be basically
everywhere we can't continue orienting
our perspective on the future on the
world as it is today we have to take
seriously this range of temperature
temperatures two degrees to four degrees
that were on track for the century as a
way of generating sufficient activity
and response and adapting as we need to
if we keep looking out the window and
thinking the world as it is now will
continue we're not going to do anything
and that's what we've done over the last
thirty years which has been catastrophic
I think that message is really important
and I think that also the message of
that we need to change and evolve as a
civilization but as a human being you
need to still enjoy your life and that
you know it's just it's it's a it's not
oh my god I need to drop everything I'm
doing that leaves any sort of a carbon
footprint it's we need to address it as
a civilization yeah I mean you know the
if the average American had the carbon
footprint of the average European
America's carbon emissions would fall by
like thirty five percent now I don't
think of Lights the difference what do
they do differently they drive less they
it's weird because they make the best
cars yeah it's like it's less territory
yeah I mean there aren't many people in
Europe who like commute an hour and a
half to work every day and that's like
not so uncommon in America their diet is
better Carbon wise and they have more
you know they have some more
of green energy stuff going on how is
their diet better carbon was they just
they waste less food basically so like a
third of all American food I think it's
a third is wasted mmm that's just wasted
carbon yeah and you know I think I think
the number of electricity is like 70% of
American electricity is wasted because
how bad the grid is like it just is so
bad at delivering from one source to net
this is one reason why it Solar City is
so important because the battery can be
a much more efficient transporter of
electricity well there's no excuse for
California I mean other than this
thought this winter it's sunny every day
yeah but so if 70% of American
electricity is wasted it's like we're
just throwing all that carbon to whatnot
you know that's giant yeah and if we
were less wasteful we'd have you know
less of a problem on our hands
but we still like order twice as much
food as we wanted then throw it out I
mean I knew that you know yeah um so you
can understand why someone would say to
you like what are you doing
but it's that sentiment behind it that's
kind of gross right yeah it's like
they're looking for you to be a
hypocrite they're trying to catch you
well when I look at hypocrisy what I see
is like you know you want the world to
be a better place than you yourself are
doing yes it's like that to me there's a
way of it's like we think of hypocrisy
is like a negative quality I think it's
kind of a positive it can be a positive
quality you believe we should be
behaving in the way collective right
yeah yeah and incise need to adjust like
you're saying not just what everybody
needs to do what you need to do as well
yeah conscious of this need to change
and like you know if someone believes in
say like better health care we don't ask
them to donate all of their money to
hospitals
that's what taxation is for like policy
directs our cultural energy towards
targets that we want to reach so again
as a civilization we need to adjust yeah
and as an individual we need to be aware
so that we promote and support this idea
of a civilization shifting yeah yeah
listen man thank you thanks for scaring
the shit out of me thanks for coming
down here tell people with the name of
your book one more time please it's
called the uninhabitable earth the
subtitle is life after warm
it's on my Instagram and we'll put a
link to it on Amazon on Twitter and
thank you David oh man great man it's
great to meet you too good luck with
your book round and really I think it's
gonna make a big impact thank you
you